BEST THINGS TO DO IN NEW ZEALAND’S NORTH ISLAND

For New Zealand’s North Island attractions, we’ll start right at the top of the island at one of the country’s most famous beaches. The large majority of the things to do in the North Island are concentrated around the top half of the diamond-shaped island. With this in mind, you could forgo seeing kiwis on Kapiti Island, and drive in a circular route instead.
#1 Boogie Board Down Sand Dunes at 90-Mile Beach

For the young and young at heart, Ninety Mile Beach is just waiting for an adventure. Miles (deceivingly only 55 of them) of pure white sand await at the northern tip of New Zealand’s north island.

Popular activities include surfing the left-hand breaks or bodyboarding down the giant sand dunes. Either one will get your heart pumping and your soul singing!

Just a word of warning – you’ll need to keep an eye out for unexpected traffic on the sand… This beach is actually an official highway!

And while it may be tempting to take a trip down the scenic route yourself, it’s probably best to leave the driving to experienced guides. Most car rental companies won’t cover you if the worst should happen.

Book Your 90-Mile Beach Tour Here
#2 Set Sail in the Bay of Islands

One of the greatest things about New Zealand is its accessibility. The best sights aren’t reserved for the rich and resourceful, anyone can enjoy the spectacular nature of this wild land.

This rings true no more so than in the lush surrounds of the Bay of Islands. What feels like a wealthy sanctuary of perfect beaches, deserted islands, and secluded inlets, is accessible to everyone. And this region of New Zealand’s North Island is concealing some of the country’s most interesting and important historical sites.

Hire a boat or a kayak to fully immerse yourself in this slice of paradise. Paddle out to the ‘Hole in the Rock’ on Piercy Island, or go in search of New Zealand’s marine life. Dolphins, whales, fur seals, and penguins all love this area of New Zealand as much as we do!

Book Your Bay of Islands Sailing Experience Here
#3 Climb a Volcanic Island

Rangitoto Island is New Zealand’s youngest volcano – erupting from the sea a mere 600 years ago. A scenic reserve, the island is uninhabited save for the native birdlife that thrives here.

A daily ferry service will deliver you to the island where you can spend the day exploring the various walks on offer – including the most popular summit track. This short, steep track will reward you with breathtaking 360 views over Auckland and its islands.

One of the most unique ways of experiencing Rangitoto Island is to take the evening guided kayak. This tour allows you to watch the sun setting from the summit, before paddling back across the Waitemata harbour under the stars.

Book Your Ferry to Rangitoto Island or Evening Guided Kayak Here
#4 Sample Some of New Zealand’s Finest Wines on Waiheke Island

Waiheke Island is a popular day trip from Auckland City and is super easy to get to by ferry.

Although the island’s beaches are noteworthy, it’s undoubtedly the award-winning wines grown here that draw visitors back time and time again.

With nearly 30 vineyards competing for space on the 92 sq km island, it’s not hard to see why it has earned a reputation as a wine lover’s playground. A popular pastime is to take a wine tour to some of the more popular vineyards, or stay for a few days in an exquisite holiday villa and sample the wines on island time.

Book Your Waiheke Wine Tasting Tour Here
#5 Chow Down on New Zealand’s Favourite Exhibit
Giapo makes the best ice cream in the world. It's one of the best Auckland things to do. New Zealand things to do.

Did you know New Zealand is home to the only colossal squid display in the world? Wellington’s Te Papa Museum houses the 470kg specimen that was captured in Antarctic waters in 2007.

It’s a much loved New Zealand icon and now another of the country’s icons – Giapo – have recreated the squid into an edible work of art! Giapo has long been famous for creating the most incredible ice cream in the world, and their latest creation – the Colossal Squid – is no exception.

A visit to Giapo’s Auckland store is always an experience in itself, so head downtown to sample an amazing range of flavours (which includes many vegan varieties!) and tick this New Zealand must-do off your list!

Visit Giapo Here
#6 Walk up Auckland’s Highest Volcanic Cone

A surprisingly short walk will have you at the top of Auckland’s highest volcanic cone, Mount Eden. Catch your breath (it’s a fairly steep walk) as you take in the expansive views of Auckland City and its busy harbour.

The 50m deep crater is unlike anything you’re likely to have experienced before. It’s a sacred place, so be sure to admire it from above rather than walking through it.

View the relics of an ancient Māori village, and on the way back down, check out the Eden Gardens, a tranquil oasis in a bustling city.

Book a Cultural Walking Tour of Mount Eden Here