
New Zealand’s first towns

Māori lived in small, family-based villages (kāinga) rather than larger towns. New Zealand’s first town was Kororāreka (now Russell) in the Bay of Islands, where early whalers came for provisions and recreation.

Some towns were set up by the government, and others by private businesses. The New Zealand Company founded towns at Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin. Auckland became the capital in 1841.
Types of towns

    Market towns serviced the surrounding farming area (for example, Masterton, Timaru).
    Mining and milling towns grew near natural resources such as gold, coal or timber (Alexandra, Dargaville).
    Port towns were centres for fishing and shipping (Ōamaru).
    Military towns were founded as bases for soldiers in the New Zealand wars (Pātea).
    Construction towns housed workers who were building a railway, dam, factory or other project (Twizel, Mangakino).

Becoming cities

Some towns grew into cities because they had ports for shipping goods. Others grew because they were the site of government, business or industry. New Zealand developed four main cities: Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin.

A town was classified as a city when it had 20,000 people. Since 1989, a town has needed 50,000 people to become a city.
Country and city

Early colonisers planned New Zealand as a farming society, but many people preferred to live in cities, where there were more jobs, and more social and cultural life. Over time, the urban population grew.
Transport and suburbs

At first most people lived near their work; later they could catch trams or buses. After cars arrived, new suburbs were built on the edges of cities. Many families chose to live in the suburbs, and central cities became quieter. But from the 1990s apartments were built in inner cities, and new bars, cafés and businesses opened, making cities lively again.
Changing cities

Auckland grew into New Zealand’s biggest city. In 2006 it had almost one-third of the population. Hamilton and Tauranga also grew to become main cities.

Early cities had mostly Pākehā people; now they have a mix of different ethnicities. Many cities hold festivals to celebrate arts, culture and sports.



The difficulties of New Zealand’s first towns did not deter the founding of others. As before, new towns were a mix of private and government initiatives. Most were on the coast, but in 1854 New Zealand’s first inland town, Greytown, was founded. As the Crown continued to buy (or confiscate) Māori land, more inland towns were built.

New towns were generally market, mining, milling, port, military or construction towns. Some started life in one or more categories and grew into others. Other settlements initially boomed, but then faded away.
Market towns

Also called country towns, market towns serviced farming hinterlands and were the most common type. They supplied farmers with goods and services – from food and machinery to stock-and-station and banking services – and acted as processing and transportation points for farm products. Market towns both followed and preceded the settlement of hinterlands. For instance, pastoralists were already farming in the area when William and George Rhodes laid out the town of Timaru in 1853. Conversely, Masterton was founded in 1854 to promote farming in Wairarapa.
Public–private partnership


Usually towns were founded by either the government or private enterprise. Timaru was established by both. In 1853 the Rhodes brothers surveyed a town behind Caroline Bay; three years later the government surveyed its own town south of the Rhodes’ settlement. North Street divided the settlements – which eventually merged.

Mining and milling towns

Towns arose near natural resources – gold, coal, timber – that could be profitably extracted. Alexandra mushroomed when gold was discovered nearby in 1862. Brunner developed as a coal town from 1864. Dargaville grew rapidly from 1872 as a base for kauri timber and gum extraction. When resources were exhausted, mining and milling towns declined unless they found a new economic base. Dargaville prospered because its hinterland converted to farming; Alexandra survived as a horticultural town, but Brunner was abandoned.
Port towns

Port towns developed as fishing and shipping centres. The South Island’s first town, Riverton, began as a whaling port in the 1830s. After whaling declined in the 1840s it shipped timber, flax, gold and wool sourced from its hinterland. A port town often grew by developing its infrastructure. During the 1870s Ōamaru (also a market town) built an expensive breakwater port, enabling it to surpass the rival ports of Kakanui and Moeraki.

Some port towns were satellites of larger towns or cities. Dunedin’s shallow harbour prevented a deep-water port beside the settlement, so Port Chalmers – close to the harbour entrance – became the city’s main port.
Peaceful Parihaka


Parihaka was unique in being a Māori town. Founded in the late 1860s by Te Whiti o Rongomai and Tohu Kākahi, its purpose was to peacefully resist Pākehā colonisation. By the late 1870s it had its own bank and police force, and a permanent population of 1,500. In 1880 it was described by 19-year-old Mary Dobie as an ‘enormous native town of quiet and imposing character … [with] regular streets of houses’.1 However, Parihaka was also the centre of a Māori protest movement over land loss, and in 1881 the government invaded the settlement, arresting some of its inhabitants and driving many away.

Military towns

New Zealand had few military towns. From the 1840s fortifications were erected in towns like Auckland, Whanganui and New Plymouth to resist Māori attack, but trade remained their life blood. The 1860s New Zealand wars led to the founding of small towns like Pātea, where two large Crown redoubts were erected. Hamilton also began as a military post, and became a hub for the Pākehā colonisation of Waikato. Both subsequently developed as market towns.
Construction towns

Some towns developed as bases for major infrastructure projects. In the early 1900s Ohakune became a permanent camp for the completion of the North Island main trunk railway. Between 1940 and 1980 several towns were built to house workers building hydroelectric power stations. These were designed to be dismantled once individual projects were completed. Workers in some towns wanted to stay on, so settlements like Mangakino, Ōtemātātā and Twizel survived.
